Tea grows best in warm and humid climates. It will tolerate temperatures between 14 and 27°C (57.2–80.6°F) with 18–20°C (64.4–68°F) being optimum. Tea plants will not tolerate frost and mean temperatures should not fall below 13°C (55.4°F) or exceed 29°C (84.2°F). Tea grows optimally in deep, well-draining, tropical red soils with an acidic pH between 4.5 and 6.0. Tea requires an average annual rainfall of 1600 mm per year distributed evenly throughout the growing season. In growing regions that experience a long dry season, tea plants require shading to increase the humidity around the plants. propogationTea is propagated from seed or rooted leaf cuttings. Good quality seeds are selected by immersing in water for 30 minutes and selecting the seeds which sink. Seeds are commonly germinated by placing them between wet cloths. Seeds which successfully germinate are transferred to a nursery bed to grow for 2–3 years. Before transplanting to the field, the plants are cut back to a height of 15 cm (6.0 in). Leaf cuttings are also used to establish new tea plantations. Single node cuttings are taken from the desired variety and rooted in polyethylene bags containing soil by firmly pressing the stem into the soil. The bags are then placed in a shaded area and watered regularly. New tea plants produced from rooted cuttings are usually planted out in the field after 6–9 months. Tea can be planted as single rows, double rows or as a hedge. Plantations established on slopes are planted on contour rows. Seedlings or cuttings are usually planted 60 cm (24 in) apart, allowing 1.5 m (5 ft) between rows. The tea plants are often interplanted with legumes or grasses to conserve soil moisture and prevent soil erosion. Shade trees are utilized in tea plantations grown at lower altitudes. General care and maintenance Newly planted tea plantations must be kept free from weeds while the tea plants establish. Weeding should be done by hand until the canopy closes and shades out weeds. Tea plants should be pruned to encourage the production of lateral branches. Busjes are shaped by tipping and thinning of branches to create the desired shape. Pruning should be maintained throughout the life of the plantation to keep the plants a manageable size and maintain productivity. pruning is best carried out when the plants are dormant where possible. If trees do not have a dormant period then they should be pruned in winter or after the dry period depending on geographic location. The tree clippings can be left in the centers of the rows to acts as an organic mulch. Tea plantations are usually fertilized 2–3 times per year. The amount of each nutrient added to the soil will depend on the soil’s own deficiencies and should ideally be based on the results of soil testing or by testing the leaves for nutrient deficiencies. Harvesting Tea is harvested by “plucking” which involves the removal of the youngest leaves at the shoot terminals. The terminal bud is removed along with the   two leaves directly below (fine plucking) or the bud and three leaves (coarse plucking). The younger leaves have the best flavor and removing three leaves increases production but diminishes the overall quality by including an older leaf. Tea plants are plucked by hand by grasping the plant between thumb and forefinger and is usually carried out every 7–14 days depending on altitude.

Blister blight,Red rust,Brown blight, grey blight,Twig die back, stem canker,Brown root rot disease,Red root rot disease, are the tea Diseases.

 Small, pinhole-size spots are initially seen on young leaves less than a month old. As the leaves develop, the spots become transparent, larger, and light brown, After about 7 days, the lower leaf surface develops blister-like symptoms, with dark green, water-soaked zones surrounding the blisters, Following release of the fungal spores, the blister becomes white and velvety, Subsequently the blister turns brown, and young infected stems become bent and distorted and may break off or die. are the Blister blight symptoms.

Leaves develop lesions that are roughly circular, raised, and purple to reddish-brown. The alga may spread from leaves to branches and fruit, Most algal spots develop on the upper leaf surface, Older infections become greenish-gray and look like lichen. Cephaleuros usually does not harm the plant re the Red rust Disease symptoms.

Small, oval, pale yellow-green spots first appear on young leaves. Often the spots are surrounded by a narrow, yellow zone, As the spots grow and turn brown or gray, concentric rings with scattered, tiny black dots become visible and eventually the dried tissue falls, leading to defoliation. Leaves of any age can be affected. are the Brown blight, grey blight Disease symptoms.

The first symptoms include browning and drooping of affected leaves. As the disease spreads into the shoots, they become dry and die. The entire branch can die from the tip downward, Dying branches often have cankers-shallow, slowly spreading lesions surrounded by a thick area of bark are Twig die back, stem canker Disease symptoms.

Tea plants of all ages are susceptible to this disease. Affected bushes occur in patches, usually around old tree stumps, but sometimes isolated bushes are affected Plants become weaker and their leaves begin to turn yellow and finally wilt and defoliate, eventually leading to death of the plant, Longitudinal cracks are usually present on the collar above the soil level but also on the tap root and lateral roots, Scrapping of the bark at the collar region reveals sheets of creamy white mycelia and the wood has a strong mushroom like-smell Brown root rot d Disease symptoms.

The pathogens survive on leaves or stems and in fallen plant host debris, Disease is readily spread by the dispersal of spore by wind are Survival and spread of Disease symptoms is 

The pathogens reproduce and survive in spots on leaves or stems and in fallen plant host debris is Survival and spread of Red rust disease.

Frequent rains and warm weather are favorable conditions for these pathogens. For hosts, poor plant nutrition, poor soil drainage, and stagnant air are predisposing factors to infection by the algae are Favorable conditions for Red rust disease.

The pathogen survives in decay plant debris which is the sourse of primary infection, When young twigs of susceptible cultivars are cut and used to root new plants, latent mycelium in the leaf tissue may start to invade nearby cells to form brown spots, and this may lead to death of leaves and twigs are Survival and spread of Brown blight, grey blight Disease symptoms.


The disease is favored by poor air circulation, high temperature, and high humidity or prolonged periods of leaf wetness is Favourable conditions of Brown blight, grey blight Disease symptoms.

The fungus usually requires wounded plant tissue to gain entry and initiate infection, Spores are spread when splashed by rain and can survive for several weeks on pruned branches left in the field are Survival and spread of Twig die back, stem canker.

Rainy weather favors its spread, and dry conditions promote its development are Favourable conditions of Twig die back, stem canker.

Disease is spread by spores carried by wind, lodges on stumps of shade trees; infection spreads mainly through root contact and alternate hosts are Coffee, Grevillea, Albizia and Erythrina is Survival and spread of Brown root rot disease.

Disease is common in low elevation areas. Humid and rainy season favour the development of disease are Favourable conditions of Brown root rot disease.

The pathogen is soil borne and mycelium present in the soil is the source of primary infection is Survival and spread of Red root rot disease.

Humid and rainy season favour the development of the disease is Favourable conditions of Red root rot disease.

Growing tea used to be done from seeds that were re-planted. Nowadays reproduction of tea plants is basically accomplished by taking cuttings from selected plants.
The cuttings are taken from the chosen plants and then replanted onto nursery beds where they will remain for 12 to 18 months. As soon as they turn into young plants, they are replanted in the main plantation, being spaced out in such a way that the fully grown bushes will cover the entire area when they reach maturity.
The plant is left for 4 years before any leaves can be plucked. Constant pruning and shaping will form its required height of 1.20m, hence creating the plucking table and giving a good framework to the bush. It will not reach full growth until the fifth year when it will begin to produce. It will still be pruned at varying intervals - on average every two years - in order to keep it at a good height for plucking.
A mature tea plant does not usually live for more than 40 or 50 years. Nonetheless some varieties can live up to 100 years. At the end of the fifth year, the tea plant is ready to be harvested. This operation, which consists of a light, repeated, pruning of the young shoots, is carried out in a 7 to 15 days cycle, depending on the growth, the climate and the amount of tea to be plucked

Bone meal, fish meal, and other organic manures may also be available in a non-contaminated environment. Wood ash can also be applied are Organic fertilizers can be use for tea plants.

Fertilizer should be applied before the onset of monsoon. Fertilizers must be broadcast around the drip circle and avoid contact with the collar. Apply fertilizer on moist soil after the first rains of spring during March-April. Soil should be moist to a depth of 45 cm. Apply fertilizer on clean ground free from weeds. In unpruned sections, apply fertilizers after the bushes have made some growth. In prune Tea or skiffed Tea, fertilize after a few leaves of the bushes have come out. Remember that do not apply fertilizer on rainy days

Regular soil and leaf analysis are necessary to evaluate the results of fertilizer methods and plant nutrient removal. Farmers can create a helpful record of crop response to fertilizer by monitoring leaf and soil nutrient levels with past fertilizer use, oil, and biomass production over several seasons. Where there is no standard maximum leaf level, comparing nutrient levels with a healthy and unhealthy plant will help diagnose a nutritional problem.
Soil fertility and nutrient availability are the essential component of the environment that determines the productivity of plants. In the agro-ecosystem, fertilizers are necessary to maintain yields due to the constant release of nutrients from the soil through harvesting. The use of fertilizer in Tea production is a typical administrative process. To meet the growing demand for Tea, the area per crop production unit has to be increased. Artificial fertilizers containing nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium have increased the production of agricultural products. So, strategies to improve agricultural production in developing countries.
should consider nitrogen and phosphorus supplementation through microbial processes. It can be achieved through the use of organic fertilizers. 

Nutrition analysis can help: Diagnose deficiencies/toxicity, Develop a fertilizer program, Measure the removal of nutrients, Survey the nutritional status of crops Compare nutritional status between regions.

The average dose of fertilizer for Tea is Nitrogen = 10 kg nitrogen for every 100 kg crop, P2O5 = 30 to 40 kg,  K2O = 40 to 50% Nitrogen content depends on soil type and climatic conditions.

Fertilize Tea plants every two months when they grow actively in spring and summer. In the first year, apply a mixture of 1/2 pound full, slow-release fertilizer. Then, add 1/ 1/2 to each application next year. Spray the fertilizer around the plant base, about six inches from the stem, and water well after each use are Liquid fertilizer applications.

Spread the fertilizer mixture evenly over the Tea-covered area, Be careful not to apply fertilizer on bush collars and leaves, Note that fertilizer is not applied in lumps in the collar area, hurting the roots, Use plastic buckets of suitable size, preferably to carry fertilizers inside the section are Method of application of liquid fertilizer.

Nitrogen – Yellowing of tiny leaves. The leaves are rough, hard, and reduced in size,  
Potassium – Due to chlorosis and necrosis occurring, scorching on the tip of mature Tea leaves and spreads along the edges. Dominant purple / brown color and leaf size reduction are common symptoms. 
Calcium – After curling downwards, small spots appear on the lower surface of young leaves. 
Magnesium – Essential symptoms include the yellowing of mature leaves, intervening chlorosis, and premature leaf fall. 
Sulfur – Special symptoms are ‘net veining’ in small leaves where the leaf blade takes on a striking yellow color, and the veins are mainly dark green towards the best branches below.
 Zinc – Plants show short internodes, chlorotic and small sickle-shaped leaves, and blocked auxiliary shoots. are Deficiency symptoms in Tea.

Nitrogen – It is used to prepare protoplasm, protein, and chlorophyll. Large quantities are required, and the application level should be approximately the same as potassium applications. If the deficiency of the plants turns yellow and the growth stops, the symptoms first appear in the old. leaves because the nitrogen in the plant is very active. Therefore, deforestation of native plants in the forest is generally rare.
Phosphorus – It promotes strong root growth. Phosphate fertilizers are often recommended for the early development of many crops, for example, superphosphate 300 kg per hectare. However, it does not move quickly in the soil and can adapt to soils (especially in acidic and red volcanic soils), making it unavailable to plants. Therefore, when using phosphorus fertilizer, it is recommended to add it to the soil (i.e., before planting) and band instead of spreading.
Potassium -potassium is included in photosynthesis and is required by plants in large quantities. It is often deficient in areas with high rainfall, sandy soils, and where vegetation is heavily harvested. If it is defective, it causes marginal necrosis of the leaves. The soil in this region is generally deficient in potassium. Tea requires more than moderate amounts of potassium, and large parts of the leaf are removed, thus depleting soil reserves. The increasing rate of potassium used in the cut year encourages the formation of healthy farmers. Muriate of potash is a source of potassium used in Tea plantations. 
Copper – It is involved in the formation of chloroplasts and proteins. It is deficient in high pH and sandy loam soils. When defective, it causes deformed and stunted growth and often leaves cupping. Copper sulfate 10-20 kg/ha or copper chelate (1%) is treated with foliar spray. The quantity required for Tea is relatively low, and a reduction in the effect on crop yields has been found rarely. 
Sulfur – Sulfur is involved in forming proteins and chlorophyll and is essential for photosynthesis. It can be deficient with waterlogging because sulfur precipitates out with Iron or Manganese. Sulfur deficiency is well documented in many Tea-growing areas. The sulfur content in Tea twigs is between 0.08 and 0.30%, depending on the dry matter and limiting Tea’s productivity. Its deficiency has been described as “Tea Yellows,” which is “net veining” in small leaves where the leaf blades take on a striking yellow color, and the veins are deep until the best-branched standout below. After that, they are green in color. However, the annual use of 20% nitrogen in the form of ammonium sulfate will take care of the Tea plant’s sulfur needs.
Calcium and Magnesium -The use of dolomite lime once or twice in a cycle is a regular cultural process to correct soil pH, which takes care of Ca and Mg nutrition. However, due to the antagonistic nature of Mg with K, the fields provided with more K limit the availability of Mg. To overcome this hostility, plants are recommended to use 1.0% magnesium sulfate. Four to five rounds of foliar spray effectively provided 8-10 kg of magnesium sulfate. Because Mg2 + is a mobile ion in the plant system, depletion always begins in older leaves. Yellowing of mature leaves, chlorosis in the veins, and premature leaf fall are typical symptoms of Mg deficiency in Tea.
Manganese – Manganese is used to form sugar and chlorophyll and the activity of enzymes. It is essential for the absorption of phosphorus and potassium by plants. Its deficiency is rare and only at such a high pH. The young leaves are the first to shrink. Manganese sulfate is used to treat deficiency (50 kg/ha). Manganese is absorbed in large quantities through Tea, and the plant can tolerate large amounts. The use of phosphate can stimulate the part of manganese are Essential nutrients.










